From New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
You know what the name is?
He is the worst person. His name is
What the hell? How did he ever end up in
Kentucky? His name is In Kentucky on
Tuesday, amid his own record low
approval ratings,
>> [music]
>> President Trump is asking Republican
primary voters to reject a Republican
[music] congressman that they've elected
seven times before. His name is Thomas
Massie.
>> [cheering]
>> Representative Thomas Massie. Massie is
a complete and total disaster as a
congressman and frankly as a human
being. A fiercely proud conservative who
has broken with Trump on just a handful
of votes.
>> [music]
>> We got to get rid of this loser.
This guy is bad. He's disloyal to the
Republican Party.
He's disloyal to the people of Kentucky
and most importantly he is disloyal to
the United States of America.
And he's got to be voted out of office
as soon as possible.
Instead, Trump wants Kentucky
Republicans to elect his hand-picked
challenger, Ed Gerhardt, in what has
become the most expensive House primary
[music] in American history. On the
other hand,
Ed Gerhardt
has my complete and total endorsement.
He's a true American hero and he's a
great patriot.
>> [music]
>> Today,
Times political correspondent Robert
Draper and Daily producer Kaylee O'Keefe
traveled to Kentucky [music]
to find out whether a popular
congressman
can still dissent from an increasingly
unpopular [music]
president.
It's Tuesday, May 19th.
>> Robert, welcome back to The Daily.
Thanks for having me back. Anytime.
We have established
quite clearly on the show that President
Trump has decided to use these midterm
primary elections to try to take out his
rivals within the Republican Party and
impose as much discipline on the party
as humanly possible. And so far, he's
largely succeeded in that goal taking
out Republicans who fought him in
Indiana and just a few days ago in
Louisiana.
And there's one last revenge race that
remains and in your capacity as a
chronicler of the Republican Party and
the fights within it, you decided that
that race was the most important or at
least the most interesting, which is why
I'm talking to you
from
the place where that race is about to
occur, Kentucky.
Why did you decide that that primary was
so important? Largely because Thomas
Massie, the seven-term incumbent of
Kentucky's fourth congressional
district, has been more defiant pretty
much than
all the other Republicans put together.
Repeatedly, Massie has defied Trump's
wishes and has seemed cheerfully
uncaring about what Trump wants him to
do. Right. There's nothing nuanced or
hedging about his brand of
I'm doing my own thing here.
Not in the least, no.
And as a result of this, Trump has
endorsed an opponent against him and is
encouraging
big Republican donors to back that
opponent. And tell us more about that
opponent. Sure. Uh
the man that Trump has handpicked to
oppose Thomas Massie is Ed Gallion, a
dairy farmer, Navy SEAL, and Trump
stalwart who has pledged to stand
alongside Trump and help get his agenda
passed. This is a familiar landscape for
Massie. He's been through this before.
In 2018, Trump wanted Massie taken down,
and it didn't bear any fruit. But this
time, things are a great deal closer,
where Massie has comfortably won his
primaries, sometimes with 81% of the
vote. This time around, the polls
suggest that the two candidates are dead
even. And what's so interesting to me
about this primary is that if ever there
was a moment where somebody might defy
political gravity
and survive this routine onslaught from
Trump when he thinks you've dissented
too much, it might be Massie
in this moment because of the economy
we're in, with the inflation we have,
and the unpopularity of the war that the
president has started. Perhaps, if ever
there was a moment for someone to
stand up to Trump and actually survive
the repercussions, it might be this
moment. If, in fact, Gallrein does win,
then this will suggest, among other
things, that Trump's stranglehold over
the Republican Party remains pretty much
absolute. If, on the other hand, Massie
prevails, lives to fight another day,
then it may well suggest that at a time
when Trump has exerted so much in an
effort to take down a candidate, but has
failed to do so, that perhaps Trump's
grip is not what it once was, and may,
in turn, embolden not just Massie, but
others like him to challenge a a
president whose unfavorables are on the
rise. Well, Robert, remind us how
Representative Massie came to be so
defiant when it comes to Trump, and why
the president finds him to be so
intolerable.
I think that it's in keeping with
the brand that Massie has held up from
the outset of his political career as
this individualist, a confirmed
eccentric, a kind of fiscal absolutist,
a person who is for individual rights
that he would hold the line on things
like no foreign aid and and that
includes no carve out exemption for
Israel. Which almost all the rest of
Republicans would find a carve out for.
Yeah, that's exactly right. And so
Massie has been viewed really
as a sort of darling within certain
elements of the Republican Party for
being a purist, for basically saying
when I say no increase in spending, I
mean no increase in spending for
anybody, including our military,
including our allies in the Middle East
such as Israel.
He's opposed Trump's intervention in
both Venezuela and Iran, saying they
betray the idea of America first.
And so he's gotten by on that for some
time and he doesn't mind being a lone
wolf, you know, tends to sit by himself
in the House chamber, you know, is sort
of this off-the-grid cow farmer who
drinks raw milk and and so there is a
kind of Paul Bunyan aspect to him.
Right. And of all the ways that Massie,
the maverick, the raw milk drinker,
decided to go against the president, I
think it's safe to say that the one he's
going to be best known for and the one
that is probably the most personally
upsetting to President Trump is
the way he decided to fight the
president on Jeffrey Epstein.
That's right. And this has been, I
think, particularly vexing for Trump
because he was never wholeheartedly for
the release of the Epstein files, but
his electoral base certainly was. Right.
>> And Massie took those desires literally
and became the champion of releasing the
files. And and at a time when Speaker
Mike Johnson was being very very
differential to Trump. If Trump doesn't
want them released, that's fine. We'll
recess the Congress rather than allow
for a vote on the subject. Massie
remained insistent, began to work with a
coalition that included the Democrat Ro
Khanna, as well as a handful of other
Republicans that all happened to be
women, and convened hearings, held press
conferences with some of the women who
were survivors of Epstein, and and
really became the public face of it.
Massie's determination was so great that
Trump ultimately had to read the tea
leaves and throw his own reluctant
support behind the legislation, the
Epstein Files Transparency Act, that in
turn forced the Department of Justice to
release those files. That was Massie and
Ro Khanna's legislation. Trump was
against it, then he was for it. But that
Trump essentially had to declare defeat
was a moment that he clearly did not
forget nor forgive Massie for.
So you go to Kentucky to try to figure
out what that version of being a
maverick within Donald Trump's
Republican Party looks like to
Republican primary voters who are being
told by the president to turn out
Congressman Massie.
That's right. And I did so because it's
really difficult to obtain ground truth
in any congressional primary from behind
one's desk in Washington, D.C. But
particularly it's a a complicated
endeavor here because this is Trump
country, after all. These are people who
really, really love the president. And
the idea of having a maverick
congressman who they also like a great
deal, but who is making the president
from time to time look bad is not
generally speaking what voters have in
mind. And it's the voters who now are
faced with a choice.
>> Right. Their party leader has said, "I
want you to vote against Massie. I want
you to vote for Ed Gallrein." And now
the question is how important is that
dictate from a president they so admire?
So as the press is getting set up, this
is a treat for all of us here in Boone
County to have The press over here is
waiting to ask
So about a week before the primary,
Kaitlyn O'Keefe and I went to a Massie
event in Boone County in the town of
Burlington. This is the northern part of
the district. We welcome Mr. Massie to
Burlington.
>> [applause]
>> It was an extremely well-attended event
in the courthouse standing room only.
We'll take questions. We have a
microphone set up here.
How much time do we have?
At least 150 or so folks there. I want
to start out by saying telling you what
I have got done in the last 6 months of
life. Okay. And Massie began it with a
presentation of a sort of his
affirmative version of why a person
should vote for him. First of all, I got
a bill passed in that has caused Prince
Andrew to no longer be a prince. The
British ambassador is no longer the
ambassador [clears throat] to the United
States. And the CEO of the World
Economic Forum, that guy had to resign
because of the Epstein files
transparency.
>> [applause]
>> He [cheering]
very quickly moved into his advocacy of
the release of the Epstein files. And he
emphasized that while he is a
tried-and-true Republican who has voted
with the Republicans 91% of the time.
That those areas in which he has
distanced himself or opposed Republican
legislative matters, he makes no
apologies for. If you're covering up for
pedophiles, if you're trying to spy on
Americans without a warrant, if you're
bankrupting this country, then I am not
voting for that. And so there are a few
times I've had to stand up and that's
why I'm in a race here where it's the
most expensive race in a Republican
primary in the country. It's the most
expensive race in the history of
Kentucky for a congressional race.
Massie made a point also of talking
about his opponent, Ed Gallion. Uh I
respect that my opponent has military
service, but I've seen some congressmen
get this wrong when they get elected.
They get to Washington, D.C. and they
ask, "Who do I report to?
Do I report to the speaker? Do I report
to the president now?" He said that that
Gallion is essentially a rubber stamp
for President Trump. And if that's what
people want, an unflagging supporter who
will do whatever Trump wants, then fine,
but that's not who Massie ever was or
ever will be. Well, when you're in the
legislative branch, you don't report to
the executive branch. I report to
750,000 of you. I'm a direct report to
you here in Kentucky. You are my bosses.
>> [applause]
>> And he spoke probably for about 15
minutes or so.
I'll take questions from anybody that
wants to ask one.
And then he immediately opened it up to
the audience. You're not just supported
here in Kentucky,
you are supported in the United States
of America.
And what kind of a reception does Massie
get there? Well, many of the comments
and questions came from people who are
really adoring of Massie. You know,
these were people who were really
applauding his principles and are very
much in lockstep and appreciative of his
independence. But people complain that
we send politicians to Washington
and they're not principled.
You stand for your principles.
And that's gold to me.
>> [applause]
>> Then came a few audience members who
were a little more skeptical.
I was in Massey. Elizabeth Smith, Union,
Kentucky. We've met. One of them was a
woman named Elizabeth Smith. Um
I've got to say for the first time in
this election season,
I have been on the fence. Who said quite
plainly, "I'm not sure who to vote for."
I
support the president more than any
other time ever in my life.
And I truly believe that President Trump
is really working tirelessly and
tirelessly every day for the American
people.
She had supported Massie in the past,
but
really was an unswerving devotee of
President Trump. And people have been
saying all these awful things that oh,
you don't support Trump and you don't
this. Please
give me a reason to vote for you this
time. Okay. And so Elizabeth Smith
basically asked Massie, "Make the case
for why I should vote for you when Trump
wants me to vote the other way." She's
basically saying, "Help me reconcile a
dynamic of me liking you and me liking
Trump." That's right. I'm First of all,
I'm not running against Donald Trump.
Massie began his reply by reminding Ms.
Smith that President Trump is not on the
ballot. I truly do have respect for his
effort and the job he's trying to do.
But if I win this race, I guarantee you
he will come right back around and I
don't And when he defies the president,
it isn't for defiance's sake, but
instead to uphold the kind of America
first principles that Trump himself ran
on.
But towards the very end of the Q&A
session, another gentleman stood up
who represented an altogether different
point of view from the ones we'd been
hearing. As I see it, the big picture is
that of all the things going on in the
nation, Iran, the economy, politics,
DEI, wokeness, crazy things. The one
person in the whole United States, maybe
the world, that understands everything,
has input on everything, is Donald
Trump.
He gets more information, more meetings,
more everything, and knows more about
all of this than probably J.D. Vance or
anybody in the Congress, anywhere. He
does. And I often The man's basic point
was the president knows more than you
do, so why aren't you deferring to this
man's obvious superiority in the
knowledge and intelligence that he has.
>> Things like that. There were four or
five bills that you voted no on that
were really important to me,
representing me, and you voted no on
those, and I was really furious. I
thought, you've got to be kidding. He
said that, "Look, you turned on Trump.
Trump is my guy." And I voted for you.
You've You've run seven times, right?
First six times I voted for you cuz I
wanted to. Seventh time because you
didn't have anybody primary you. This
time you got somebody running against
you. Yes, that is the thing. I really
don't know a whole lot about the guy,
but Trump has endorsed him, and that
means to me that he will help Trump pass
the things that I want done, okay? That
you aren't doing. And some of these This
exchange lasted for a full 14 minutes.
Wow, it's amazing. I mean, it was really
long, and at times kind of boring.
Certain people in the audience got up
and left, but Massie stood there very
patiently, letting the guy have his say,
and occasionally interrupting him not
with his own statements, but with
questions posed kind of Socratically.
You're aware, aren't you, that I'm the
one who got the Epstein files released
and that Trump considered this a
borderline act of treason.
What do you think he learned about the
Epstein files that caused him to do a
180 that makes him smarter than the
people in this room?
They should have been hidden.
I
I agree with pursuing the Epstein files.
I want to release too.
But to me, he said it was a hostile act
for me to do that.
I don't know, but to me,
he knows the big picture. There might be
things that you don't understand why he
said that that he's not even revealing
to us. Mark said that he had no problem
with the release of the files, but
seemed to be suggesting that perhaps the
president had good reason for resisting
the release of them. There were over a
thousand girls
that got molested, raped,
drawn into sex trafficking, uh recruited
at 15 years old, recruited other girls
to get raped so that they would
They never You won't find No, I'm not
willing to publish what you did with
Epstein files. I really don't I don't
think But I went against Trump when he
said that the one thing he cared about
the most What he was doing in essence
was trying to reconcile his basic view
that Massie was in the right with his
larger faith in Trump and reconcile in
Trump we trust with America first
principles. I believe that he did there
was a reason that he did that he could
not tell you or tell the public. I don't
give anybody I don't I don't give
anybody but God that KIND OF TRUST.
>> [applause]
>> AND BY THE END OF IT, I enjoyed this one
with you. Thank you. Thank you.
>> [applause]
>> Massie shook the guy's hand and said
that he enjoyed it.
I wonder Robert what you took from this
exchange and really from this entire
town hall by the time it was over.
Yeah, Michael what became clear to me is
that for as popular as Thomas Massie has
been here in in the past and really
still is with many people
the split with the president is clearly
registering with voters. Now whether
that's forcing them to reconsider their
feelings about President Trump or
deciding they aren't going to vote for
Massie, they do understand the stakes of
this race which is you are either with
Trump or you are against him and there
is no room for independence.
What I later learned was that the guy
running against Massie
the one who's got Trump's support
he understands that and in [music] fact
he's bet his entire campaign on it.
We'll be right back. [music]
>> [music]
>> So Robert you end up spending time with
Massie's rival in this race at Gallatin.
Tell us about that time. Yes, Caitlin
and I
a couple of days after the Massie event
attended a Gallatin event. All right, so
you guys can come in and start just
setting up and I'll bring you a head out
in about 10 minutes. Are they doing a
tour or something like that? And it was
a kind of an odd event I have to say it
wasn't attended by voters but instead
took place in a manufacturing plant.
It's stated purpose was to have the US
Chamber of Commerce announce it's
official endorsement of Gallatin in the
presence of a handful of members of the
press. Please welcome Ed Gallant Rhine.
So, the US Chamber guy gave a very quick
speech. Well, thank you for that. Can
y'all hear me in back back here?
Can you hear me okay?
I want to thank you for those kind
remarks, but Gallant Rhine then gave his
own 10 or 15-minute talk. And how is he
making his case about this candidacy of
his? I was 26 years old before I left
Kentucky to go off to the Navy SEALs as
an officer. I want you to hold that
thought.
I grew up on the largest dairy farm in
the state of Kentucky. Do you all
Anybody out there know anything about
dairy farm? The first thing that Gallant
Rhine did was introduce himself by
saying that he's not a politician, that
he is from a multi-generational
farming family, that he won a multitude
of Bronze Stars serving his country as a
Navy SEAL, and then finally more
recently was pressed into service again
by President Trump. I'm proud to stand
with President Trump, the Republican
Party, his American first and Kentucky
always agenda. I added that. The
President said he liked it. When I said
that, I told you I said, "It's America
first and Kentucky always. I like that,
Ed." That's what he said. President
Trump cuts taxes. And right away it
became clear that his support for Trump,
and for that matter Trump's support for
him,
is really the message that he's running
on.
I mean, he didn't talk about what
committee assignments he would like to
have. He didn't talk about America's
place in the world. He didn't talk about
specific spending bills or really any
legislation at all. President Trump
needed conservatives in Congress to
deliver for the American people and what
they voted for. What? What he talked
about was Trump. If I remember, nearly
78 million Americans voted for President
Trump.
Won 31 states, is that right, including
the swing states and 312 electoral
votes?
That is significant. That's a message.
And then after that, But Thomas Massie
stood in the way, not just against
President Trump, but against the party
and America. He described how Massie was
the person who was standing in the way
of this agenda being passed. Kentucky
deserves an American congressman who
will stand with President Trump, the
Republican Party, and conservatives, not
against him. And that the fourth
district deserved someone who was more
in keeping with the man that they had
voted for, uh Donald Trump, and that he
would be that man. So, thank you all for
coming here.
God bless President Trump, the
Republican Party. God bless Kentucky.
God bless United States of America. And
I'll take a few questions. Thank you all
for coming. Thank you all for coming
today. [applause]
And after that, he took about four
questions from members of the press. And
in its
guardrails-heavy
nature, it seemed to be the exact
opposite of Massie's free-form,
anything-goes encounter that we'd had a
couple of days earlier. And and what do
you think explains that
decision-making? Well, it's that there's
a paradoxical element of his campaign
that, while Trump desperately wants
Massie to be crushed with overwhelming
force, uh this campaign is kind of doing
so with a very, very light footprint.
And I think also is very careful about
saying anything that could possibly
offend the president who has endorsed
him, which was why, when I had an
opportunity during the Q&A,
uh you know, I asked him You did say a
couple of minutes ago that you stand
with President Trump. And Thomas Massie
has said that that's tantamount to you
being a yes-man, a rubber stamp. Are you
going to be Trump's rubber stamp? And I
wonder
if you could comment on that. If you see
yourself as someone who would be
unswervingly with the president or
someone who would be independent.
>> And what did he say? So first of all, I
want to give you scene setter. I guess I
should have got five bronze stars to
demonstrate my personal courage and
independence to act on my own. I guess I
should have served a three times at SEAL
Team Six instead of two. But they have
rules about that and you don't do so
much. There's no point of importance
about that. I got to give thanks to
other folks I did that, but it's a long
way from a dairy farm in the Ohio River
to SEAL Team Six and I'm not talking
geography.
You know, beyond describing his resume,
he was essentially conflating individual
courage with uh political independence,
which struck me as two different things.
The president knows who I am.
He knows what I stand for.
He knows exactly who he was talking to.
I am no rubber stamp. Will never happen.
And um said that being a rubber stamp
was never who he was nor who he would
ever be.
No sirree, Bob. I'll put a bow on it
with this. I represent these folks here.
I'm their servant leader and the
president knows that. You can count on
it. But I wanted to push on that idea
just to learn a little more from the
candidate as to really just what he'd
like to be as a congressman.
So I paid him a call. Robert Draper.
Hey. Hey Robert, where you at now? And
what exactly did you ask him what did he
say and were you able to fully resolve
this question of whether he was capable
of
being anything other than a Trump
teammate? Yeah, I started in our brief
phone interview by asking him the most
basic of questions. I'm just curious to
know what House committees you'd like to
serve on. You're a man of varied
interests and and you could go in a
bunch of different directions. So what
do you what do you have in mind? What's
on your wish list? What House committees
would he like to serve on? Right. I'm
going to go to Speaker Johnson and the
president
and J.D. I'm going to say, "Where you
need me, coach?" Just like when I played
ball at at Franklin Simpson, when I
played ball at Centre College, when I
played ball at Murray.
That is a team sport. Governing is a
team sport. Now, I got my desires, I got
places I think I fit, but he knows what
the whole ball team looks like. Does
that make sense?
>> Sure. And the answer that he gave me was
whatever the coach says. Speaker Johnson
and President Trump would be the ones to
make that decision for him and that he
would happily abide by it. I mean,
to state the obvious, this is quite
different than Thomas Massie's vision of
Congress, where
independence is essential
and the prerogatives of the Congress are
to do what individual members think is
necessary, regardless of the team
they're on, regardless of what the
president wants. That's right. Yeah, and
and I pressed him later on whether he
would have done as Massie did on the
release of the Epstein files and he
basically said, well, I'm for
transparency, but I'm for transparency
in a way that doesn't cause any conflict
with the president. And [laughter] you
know, I asked him, would you be in favor
of the overthrowing the Cuban regime,
for example? And he said, I'm in favor
of liberating the Cubans, but in
whatever way the president wants to
achieve that, I'm fine. So, in our brief
conversation, at no point was there any
suggestion that he would assert himself
as an individual, instead he would be an
enabler of whatever the Trump
administration had in mind.
And look, to be fair, this is the
calculation he's making, that if he's
going to have a shot in this race, he's
got to present himself as an alternative
to Massie. And right now, Massie's
biggest vulnerability is that he's lost
the support of the president in a state
where the president is very popular.
So, Gal Ryan is running as the
alternative to that.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh and Gal Ryan has
an incredible financial war chest uh
supporting him. Uh and by supporting
him, what I really mean is attacking
Massie. Mhm.
You had said earlier that this race
remains quite close. And so it's
tempting to ponder all the implications
of Massie surviving this, all the
implications of Massie losing this race.
But I wonder if at the end of the day
those implications aren't so far apart.
If Massie loses, Trump will have clearly
shown that there's no tolerance for
opposing him even when somebody like
Massie is taking out positions that are
really grounded in what Trump claims his
political movement is all about. But
even if Massie wins,
the message to everyone else in the
Republican Party is do you really want
to go through what I just went through
in the name of independence from Trump?
And the answer's probably no. So, either
way, I might argue, Trump achieves his
goal of imposing a very high degree of
ideological conformity, right? That's
right. It's definitely the case. But it
also comes
with a certain risk, right? I mean,
because we've just come out with this
poll The New York Times has showing how
on the generic ballot Democrats are up
by 10 or something. So, to basically,
you know, wed yourself to Trump is
really to be rolling the dice that this
fidelity to the president is not going
to prove damaging to the entire party.
>> Mhm. And so, yeah, I mean, it's, you
know, Trump has basically sent this
message which I believe win or lose by
Massie is still going to be present. But
meanwhile, uh Republicans cannot be
inattentive to this greater electoral
message, the storm clouds that are
gathering suggesting that when it comes
to general elections, it's a deeply
problematic thing siding with the
president.
>> Right. I mean, if the midterms were held
today, according to the New York Times
poll that came out on Monday, the one
when just referenced, it's very clear
that Republicans would almost certainly
lose the house based on all the factors
you just described. They wouldn't lose
Massie's seat. Whether it's Massie or
Gallarin, it's going to be held by a
Republican. But nationally, these polls
suggest swing districts are going to
swing Democratic. And what Trump is
saying to every Republican
in this very expensive Massie race is,
do not dare trying to break with me even
if I am steering this car off the
midterm cliff. Well, if Trump
understands nothing else, he understands
leverage.
And he has always shown a willingness to
use that leverage. And that leverage
includes no small element of fear. It
does send a formidable message that you
don't want to tangle with this guy.
And we have not seen any president, I
think, in modern history, perhaps in the
history of American politics, who has
had such command over his party
even in defiance of public opinion polls
that would suggest that people
be a little bit wary of [music] that
fidelity to Trump.
Well, Robert,
thank you very much. My pleasure,
Michael. [music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know
[music] today. On Monday, a jury
rejected Elon Musk's lawsuit claiming
that [music] OpenAI, the artificial
intelligence company he co-founded, had
violated its original mission by putting
commercial interests over the good of
humanity.
Jurors did not rule on the merits of
Musk's argument. [music] Instead, they
found that Musk brought his lawsuit
against OpenAI and its chief executive,
Sam [music] Altman, after the statute of
limitations had expired.
And the Trump administration has created
[music] an unusual $1.8 billion fund
overseen by the president's allies to
compensate those [music] who claim they
were politically targeted by the Justice
Department under President Biden.
Democratic officials called it a
taxpayer-financed [music]
slush fund that would enrich Trump's
supporters. And they predicted it would
make payouts [music]
to, among others,
those convicted of participating in the
January 6th riots at the US [music]
Capitol.
Today's episode was produced by Caitlyn
O'Keefe, Anna Foley, [music] and Olivia
Natt with help from Chris Benderav.
It was edited [music] by Devon Taylor
and Rachel Quester and contains music
>> [music]
>> by Pat McCusker, Marion Lozano, and Dan
Powell. Our theme [music] music is by
Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro. [music]
See you tomorrow.